.ve-header "Rebels and Radiation in Richard Misrach" https://iiif.harvardartmuseums.org/manifests/object/371385

Human advancement is affecting the environment, an undeniable truth for anyone who pays attention to the world around them. Unfortunately, this effect is negative, and while many people look the other way, there has been an increasing number of people pushing for these changes to be acknowledged in recent years. As a result, art, which has always been a record of the changes in our social and natural environments, reflects this with an increasing number of artists creating pieces inspired by these environmental changes. Among these artists is an American Photographer, Richard Misrach. Richard Misrach, as a photographer, found many forms of documentarianism and aesthetic forms of photography exploitative, misleading, and untruthful for those viewing the photo. So in his pursuit to show the unfiltered truth of how humanity and the government are afffecting the environment, he turned his sights to the U.S.'s deserts, forgotten barren wastelands to most Americans, but to him, ground zero for the devastating effects humanity can have on the environment. This mission led to him becoming a master trespasser of many desert government facilities to document the harsh realities and later combined into a series he called *Desert Cantos*.
    
# Princesses against Plutonium
.ve-media https://iiif.harvardartmuseums.org/manifests/object/361428

Through his series *Desert Cantos* and his trespassing activities, he met a group of activists who inspired a unique photo. *Princesses Against Plutonium* is a thought-provoking photo representing how man and nature clash and how people's actions can affect the environment. The photo is of 9 women who, in the spring of 1988, invaded the Nevada Nuclear test site in full body suits and purge masks to hand out pamphlets to workers. These pamphlets contained information warning workers of the hazardous and often invisible effects of nuclear radiation on the human body. These women were arrested relatively quickly. However, their rebellion inspired several 'copy cat' invasions and arrests that eventually caused a severe enough backup in the legal system that the Supreme Court decided to cut its losses and dismiss the charges against the original nine princesses. This photo and many of his other photos radiate this sense of isolation, bleakness, and dread. He achieves the vibe of bleakness through a lack of saturation, which helps the viewer focus on the disturbing and impactful scenes he is representing rather than being distracted. It also helps magnify this sense and idea that the effect humans are having on the environment is depriving it of its vibrancy and how we are killing it. He shows the isolation through the wide frame, which reveals miles of uninhabited wasteland, with a close-up of the Princesses showing how small and isolated we all are in the grander scheme of nature, especially with how we are affecting it. Finally, the incredible sense of dread is mainly conveyed through the Princesses in their full white suits and purge masks; they look like inhuman villains straight out of a sci-fi film, and again, the lack of saturation in the photo and the harshness of the light gives the viewer a sense that the radiation from the test site is having a noticeable effect right in front of the viewers' eyes.





Sources
1. Gallery, Fraenkel. “Richard Misrach.” Fraenkel Gallery, July 12, 2024. https://fraenkelgallery.com/artists/richard-misrach. 
2. Harvard. Harvard Art Museums. Accessed September 14, 2024. https://harvardartmuseums.org/collections/person/34896. 
3. Harvard. “Princesses against Plutonium, Nuclear Test Site, Nevada.” Harvard Art Museums, 2018. https://harvardartmuseums.org/collections/object/361428?position=1&context=person&id=34896. 

